Stellenbosch University was in the news recently for another racist incident. A white student was caught urinating on the belongings of a black student. The white student, Theuns du Toit has since been suspended and is currently taking part in a disciplinary process. Daniel den Hollander, a clinical psychologist has penned this poem about the incident. Reflecting on the news of a student woken up at four am The intruder standing over his study notes, his laptop Urinating over it. First year agricultural student Dedicating his time and career to the dream of feeding his nation Studying feverishly for his upcoming exams Active listening in large lecture halls Painstakingly tracking and revising his notes Making sure he understands, making sure he remembers The pride and dignity of one day being independent and self-sufficient These notes, the product of time, sweat, and tears Urinated on The ultimate humiliation It’s a White Boy Thing Reporting it to the prims “They didn’t take the matter seriously”, he reflects “We will deal with it in the morning” Anger courageously turned into frustration Frustration constructively turned to action SASCO intervened and the matter turns to the House Father Suppression unsuccessful, the nation shows its anger In the face of an intruder drunk on conditioned superiority The wisdom to create a record, rather than violence That brought light to a brooding denial of a problem A problem with a history A history of men conditioned through hazing and psychological conditioning Through compulsory army conscription To defend against a Swart Gevaar An unethical brotherhood Men, who now sit with trauma memories of murder from their own hands Rectified by villianising the conditioned enemy Superiority from a dictator abusing Psychology Conditioned to believe themselves a superior race Now, like American History X, It lingers underneath in a bedrock of dinner conversations Old Boys clubs. You won’t understand It’s a White Boy Thing. Obsessed with your own superiority like an addict high on tik Disconnects you from that which makes you human Opening up a pussing wound of suppressed prejudice rot A smell so foul to the senses, it overpowers the stench of urine A young man stands bravely. He will not walk the road set before him of inferiority. He will not be escorted away through the indignity of a transfer. He has exams pending, this will not distract him. One day, I will be eating vegetables from the plantations under his supervision One day, I will be braaing meat from his farms Drink wine from his vineyards. It’s a Human Dignity thing. Stellenbosch University answers to Parliament about racism allegations Daniel den Hollander is a clinical psychologist who has worked in specialised mental healthcare, both in the public and private sectors. He is an activist for mental health care in South Africa. He is passionate about cultivating and promoting empowerment and change: may it be in the therapy room, on radio, at governmental stakeholder meetings, or at conferences. The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of The Daily Vox.